
The Branches File
=================

When trying to answer the research questions that drove the construction of a model and a configuration, it is often
useful to vary parameters of the configuration to simulate different scenarios.  Without any extra tooling, this would
require manually changing the configuration and re-running, which would quickly get out of hand. The branches file helps
us do this in a convenient way. For example, let's assume you have defined a model specification that includes a
dietary intervention of egg supplementation and that this intervention is parameterized by the proportion of the
population that is recruited and the starting age of recruitment. We may want to run simulations on several different
proportions like like full recruitment or no recruitment, or try a range of starting ages. We can do that easily with
the following branches file

.. code-block:: yaml
    branches:
            - egg_intervention:
                    recruitment:
                        proportion: [0.0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.0]
                    recruitment:
                        age_start: [0.0, 1.0, 10.0, 20.0, 45.0]

The ``branches`` block specifies changes to values found in the model specification, exactly matching the blocks from
the specification (underneath the branches block).  Here, the YAML list [0.0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.0] specifies values of
recruitment proportions we wish to simulate while the list [0.0, 1.0, 10.0, 20.0, 45.0] specifies starting recruitment
ages. The cartesian product of these parameters is used to define simulations, so this will result in 20 separate
simulations of the model configuration, one for every combination of recruitment proportion and recruitment age start.
This is a very convenient way to simulate multiple scenarios with different values.

Additionally, there are two other useful top-level blocks: ``input_draw_count`` and ``random_seed_count``, shown in the
example below. Note that they lie outside the branches block. ``input_draw_count`` specifies the number of input draws
from the GBD to run the simulation on, drawn uniformly from the total number of draws GBD produces, 1000.
``random_seed_count`` specifies the number of different random seeds to run simulations with. Each of these is
considered in the cartesian product of simulations as well.

.. code-block:: yaml
    input_draw_count: 10
    random_seed_count: 5

    branches:
            - egg_intervention:
                    recruitment:
                        proportion: [0.2, 0.8]

To make this concrete, let's explicitly calculate how many simulations the above branches file will result in. This is
given by input_draw_count * random_seed_count * proportions: 10 * 5 * 2 = 100 simulations.

It is important to note that any configuration option that is natively specified as a list can **NOT**
be used in the branch file.  In other words, Vivarium does not accept a list of lists in a branches specification. Also,
you should remember that varying the time step, start or end time, or the population size will make profiling jobs very
difficult and runs the risk of breaking our output writing tools. Keep this in mind when you write a branch file.
